DELHI UNIVERSITY STUDENTS’ UNION
CONSTITUTION

DELHI UNIVERSITY STUDENTS’ UNION
CONSTITUTION
CHAPTER – I
1.

Name
The Union will be called “The Delhi University Students’ Union”, hereinafter
referred to as the Union.

2.

Office
The office of the Union will be located in the Union building in the main
University Campus. It shall also be its official address.

3.

Aims and Objects
The following will be the aims and objects of the Union :(i)

To promote mutual contact, a democratic outlook and a spirit of
oneness among the students of the University of Delhi.

(ii)

To promote the social, cultural and intellectual development of the
students of the University of Delhi.

(iii)

To promote consciousness among the students of the University of
Delhi of the events taking place around them with a view to better
equipping them as responsible and educated citizens and to build up
a healthy students movement.

(iv)

To promote among the students of the University of Delhi a sense of
service to the people and duty towards the State.

2

4.

(v)

To promote harmonious relations among all sections of the
University Community.

(vi)

To meet, discuss and make representations to the University
authorities on matters concerning common interests of the students.

Activities
The Union may organize the following activities namely :(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)

Debates, lectures, discussions, study circles, essay competitions etc.
Cultural performance and contests.
Indoor games.
Publication of magazine, bulletin and wall newspapers.
Trips and tours to places of historical and educational importance.
Social Service and Social Relief Activities.
Organizing and running co-operatives.
Organize poor Boys Fund and Book Bank to help needy Students.
Such other activities as will further the realization of the above aims
and objects.

CHAPTER – II
5.

Patron
The Vice-Chancellor of the University of Delhi shall be the Patron of the
Union. The Patron shall take all necessary steps to ensure that the Union
functions in accordance with this Constitution.

6.

Membership of the Union
(i)

Students of Various Colleges/Institutions recognized by or admitted
to the privileges of the University which are members of the Union at
the commencement of this Constitution shall be the members of the
Union.

3

7.

(ii)

Students of a College/Institution may become members of the Union
by a resolution passed by absolute majority of the total number of
students on rolls of the College/Institution concerned on the last
working day of July of that year.

(iii)

Those studying only Foreign Language Courses or Diploma/Certificate
Courses of the University shall not be the members of the Union.

(iv)

Students who become members of the Union under sub clauses (i) or
(ii) of this clause may withdraw from its membership by a resolution
passed by absolute majority of the total number of students on rolls
of the College/Institution concerned on the last working day of that
year.

(v)

Resolutions passed by the students of a College/Institution under
sub-clauses (ii) or (iv) will become effective from a date to be notified
by the Patron. If a College withdraws from the membership of the
Union after the 15th of October, it would not be entitled to the
refund of its subscription of the Union funds.

Funds
Every member of Union shall pay Rupee 20/- (Ref. E.C. Resolution No. 178
Dated 21.03.2012) as annual subscription to Union funds which will be
collected alongwith the fees collected at the time of admission by the
respective College/Institutions.

CHAPTER – III
8.

The Central Council
1)

There shall be a Central Council of the Union which shall consist of
the following : -

4

9.

(i)

The Presidents of the Unions of Colleges/Institutions affiliated to the
Union, provided that such a President does not suffer from any of the
disqualifications laid down under Clause 9.

(ii)

Two members directly elected by simple majority vote from each
College/Institution, provided that a College/Institution with a total
strength of 500 or less will send only one member to the Central
Council.

(iii)

All the office-bearers of the Union elected under this Constitution.

(iv)

The Staff Advisor of the Union.

(v)

The Treasurer of the Union and

(vi)

The out-going President of the Union, provided he/she continues to
be on the rolls of a College or Institution of the University.

2)

The members of the Central Council mentioned in sub clause (iv), (v)
and (vi) above will have no right to vote in the Meetings of the
Central Council.

3)

The Central Council will be the supreme authority of the Union and
shall carry on the activities of the Union in accordance with this
Constitution.

4)

Subject to the previsions of the Constitution, the Central Council shall
have the power to give such directions to the Executive Committee
of the Union, or Sub-Committees appointed by it, and the Officebearers of the Union as it may consider necessary.

Disqualifications for students Members of the Central Council
No students shall be entitled to be a member of the Central Council if,
(i)

He/she is not a member of the Union ; or
5

(ii)

He/she has completed the age of 26 years, if he/she is a student in
day classes or 30 years, if he/she is a student in the evening classes,
at the beginning of the first term of the year in which he/she is likely
to become a member of the Central Council ; or

(iii)

He/she has completed 7 years in a University ; or

(iv)

He/she has been convicted of a criminal offence including moral
turpitude ; or

(v)

He/she has been punished by the University/College for an act
which is coercive in nature and constitutes a threat to life and
property ; or

(vi)

He/she has been found guilty of and punished for the use of unfair
means in any of the examination of a college, University or Board.

Explanation :
A mere warning issued against a student will not be deemed to be a
punishment for the purpose of this clause.
10.

The Executive Committee of the Union.
1)

There shall be an Executive Committee of the Union which shall consist
of the following : -

(i)

All the office-bearers of the Union elected under this Constitution ;

(ii) Eleven members of the Central Council elected by its members in
accordance with the system or proportional representation by means
of a single transferrable vote from among themselves provided that
not less than two out of these eleven members will be girls.
(iii) The staff Advisor of the Union.
6

(iv) The Treasurer of the Union ; and
(v)

The out-going President of the Union, provided he/she continues to
be on the rolls of a College or Institution of the University of Delhi.

2)

The members of the Executive Committee mentioned in sub clause
(iii), (iv) and (v) above will have no right to vote in the Meetings of the
Executive Committee.

3)

The Executive Committee will function within the framework of the
policies laid down by the Central Council and in accordance with this
Constitution.

4)

The Executive Committee may appoint such sub-committees as may
be necessary for the conduct of its business. A sub-committee, if
appointed, will be subordinate and responsible to the Executive
Committee.

5)

Subject to the provisions of this Constitution the Executive Committee
may give such directions to the Office-bearers of the Union as it may
deem necessary in the discharge of their duties.

6)

The Executive Committee will be responsible to the Central Council.

11. The office bearers of the Union
1)

There shall be the following office-bearers of the union:(i)
(iii)

2)

President
Secretary, and

(ii)
(iv)

Vice-President
Joint-Secretary

All the office-bearers of the Union will be directly elected by and
from amongst the members of the Union by a simple majority vote
in accordance with this Constitution and the rules framed
thereunder; provided that the Vice-President and the Joint7

Secretary will be elected by the members of the Union from among
such of the members of the Union as will not be taking a final year
examination of the University during the year in which they seek
election to the office of the Vice-President or Joint Secretary.
3)

The Executive Committee may elect a Cultural Secretary from
among its own members.

4)

All the office-bearers of the Union will function within the frame
work of the policies laid down by the Central Council and under the
general supervision and direction of the Executive Committee in the
performance of their day-to-day work. Delegation of powers, if any,
to the office bearers will have to be specifically provided for by a
resolution of the appropriate council or committee for a specific
duration of time but not exceeding one month.

5)

All the office-bearers of the Union shall be responsible to the
Executive Committee and to the Central Council and will function
strictly in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

6)

The office-bearers of the Union shall be responsible for the smooth
and orderly functioning of the Union.

12. Disqualifications for Office-Bearers
1. No member of the Union shall be entitled to hold any post of officebearer, if,
(i)

He/she has exceeded the age of 25 year on the 16th August of the
year in which he/she wishes to seek election; or

(ii)

He/she completed more than 7 year from the 1st July of the
calendar year of passing +2 examination to the 30th June
immediately preceding the election.

(iii)

He/she has been convicted of a criminal offence including moral
turpitude, or he/she has been punished by the University/College
8

for an act which is coercive in nature and constitutes a threat to
life and property; or
(iv)

He/she has been found guilty of and punished for the use of unfair
means in any examination of a University or Board.

Explanation :
A mere warning issued against a student will not be deemed to
be a punishment for the purpose of this clause.
2)

No elected office-bearers shall be entitled to hold the same office
twice.

13. Staff Advisor of the Union :
There shall be a Staff Advisor of the Union who shall be appointed by the
Patron.

14. Treasurer of the Union :
There shall be a Treasurer of the Union who shall be appointed by the
Patron.

CHAPTER – IV
15. Official Year and Tenure
(i)

The official year of the Union will be from 16th of August of every year
to the 15th of August, of the following year.

(ii)

The election of the office-bearer should be completed at the latest by
the 16th of August each year.

9

(iii)

The election of the eleven members of the Executive Committee from
among the members of the Central Council should be completed
latest by the 31st August each year;

(iv)

The Central Council, the Executive Committee, the sub-committees, if
any, and the office-bearers of the Union will not remain in office
beyond one year as defined in sub-clause (i) of this clause.

(v)

An office-bearer of the Union or a member of the Executive
Committee or the Central Council may in writing, addressed and
delivered to the Patron resign his office before the expiry of the term.

(vi)

A student shall cease to be a member of the Union when he/she
ceases to be a student; he/she shall also cease to be a member of the
Central Council, the Executive Committee or a sub-committee
thereof, and shall cease to be the office-bearer of the Union if he/she
was such a member or an office-bearer.

16. Election
(i)

The Patron will appoint every year a Chief Election Officer and other
Election Officers who shall arrange to conduct the elections of the
office-bearers and the members of the Central Council of the Union
for that year in various Colleges and Institutions of the University.

(ii)

The Staff-Advisor of the Union conduct the elections of the members
of the Executive Committee of the union.

CHAPTER – V
17. Functions of the Officer Bearers of the Union
1)

(i) The President of the Union will be the Chief Executive Head of the
Union and will function in all matters relating to the Union in
accordance with this Constitution.

10

(ii) The Secretary of the Union will act in consultation with the
President and will function in all matters relating to the Union in
accordance with this Constitution;
(iii) In the absence of the President, the Vice-President of the
Union will perform all the function of the President in accordance
with this Constitution;
(iv) In the absence of the President and the Vice-President, the
Secretary will discharge the functions of the President in addition to
his duties as the Secretary of the Union.
(v) In the absence of the Secretary, the Join-Secretary of the Union
will perform all the functions of the Secretary in accordance with this
Constitution.
2)

(i) The President of the Union shall preside at the meetings of the
Central Council and the Executive Committee and it shall be his duty
to conduct these meetings in an orderly and peaceful manner in
accordance with this Constitution.
(ii) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Union to prepare the
minutes of all the meetings of the Central Council and Executive
Committee and to keep the records of these meetings properly and
in safe custody.
(iii) The Secretary of the Union will also carry on correspondence on
behalf of the Union and will keep and maintain all records.

18. Meetings
(i)

The Central Council will meet at least thrice a year;

(ii)

The Executive Committee will meet as often as may be necessary,
but at least in a month.

11

(iii)

The meetings of the Central Council or the Executive Committee will
be convened by the Secretary of the Union by giving at least 7 days’
notice. An emergency meeting of the Executive Committee may,
however, be convened in consultation with the Staff Advisor by
giving at least 24 hours notice.

(iv)

All the meetings of the Central Council and the Executive Committee
shall be held at the Union office.

(v)

An agenda of the meeting will be issued alongwith the notice of the
meeting except for an emergency meeting.

(vi)

The notice of a meeting and a copy of the agenda (except for an
emergency meeting) for the meeting will be duly served on all the
members; the notice of the meeting would be served as under:

1)
2)
3)

For Central Council under certificate of Posting.
For Executive Committee by registered Post.
For an emergency meeting by telegram.

(vii)

The attendance and the minutes of the meetings of the Central
Council and the Executive Committee shall be confirmed in the
subsequent meeting. A copy of the confirmed minutes shall be
furnished to the Staff Advisor immediately thereafter.

(viii) A register of attendance of the members at the meeting of the
Central Council and the Executive Committee shall be maintained by
the Secretary and signed by the Staff Advisor or in his absence by the
Treasurer at each meeting.
(ix)

A meeting of the Central Council or the Executive Committee may be
requisitioned, by not less than 25% of the members thereof,
excluding those who have right to vote, submit such a requisition in
writing to the Secretary, who shall thereupon call such a meeting
within a period of one week from the date of receipt of the
requisition. The Staff Advisor may call the meeting on the failure of
the Secretary to do so.
12

19. Quorum
In all ordinary as well as emergency meetings of the Central Council or the
Executive Committee one-third of the total membership of the body will
constitute the quorum.

20. Vote of No-Confidence
(i)

Not less than one-third members of the Central Council of the Union
may move a resolution of no-confidence against any of the elected
office bearers ;

(ii)

Such a resolution cannot be moved before the First of December of
the year.

(iii)

A notice of a minimum of 15 days will be required for such a
resolution to be moved.

(iv)

Such a resolution in order to be effective will be required to have
been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total
membership of the Central Council.

(v)

In case no-confidence motion is directed against the President, the
Staff Advisor shall preside at the meeting.

CHAPTER – VI
21.

Budget and Accounts
A meeting of the Central Council shall be convened within two weeks of the
formation of the Executive Committee and the budget estimates proposed

13

by the Executive Committee shall be placed before the Central Council for
Consideration.
A copy of the budget as approved by the Central Council shall be filed with
the Patron within 2 days after its approval.

22. Funds
(i)

Funds of the Union will be utilized for the welfare of the students in
accordance with the approved budget.

(ii)

No expense out of the Union funds will be incurred unless provision
with regard to them is made under a specific head of the duly
approved budget.

(iii)

Each item of expenses of more than Rs. 500/- will be made by the
Union only after it is duly authorized by a specific resolution of the
Executive Committee of the Union. A sum of Rs. 500/- however will
be advanced to the Union as imprest money. Ordinarily no other cash
advance will be permitted. Should it be necessary to advance cash to
the Union the total amount thus advanced at a time shall not exceed
Rs. 2000/-.

(iv)

All expenses out of the Union fund will be incurred in accordance
with the rules made in this regard.

(v)

The Treasurer will regulate the disbursement of Union funds in
accordance with the rules framed in this regard from time to time.

(vi)

The Accounts of the Union shall be subject to audit by the Internal
Auditor of the University as well as the Chartered Accountant
approved by the University. The Accounts of Union will be audited
twice in a year at half yearly intervals.

(vii)

Unspent balance of the Union funds of a year, if any, will be credited
to a special fund of the Union. The money under this fund may be
14

spent for student welfare purposes in accordance with the rules
framed by the University in this behalf

CHAPTER – VII
23. Amendment of the Constitution
A provision of this Constitution may also be amended if such amendment is
agreed to and passed by a majority of the total membership of the Central
Council at the beginning of the year and by a majority of not less than twothirds of the members of the Central Council present and voting in meeting
specially called for this purpose by giving at least one month notice in
advance, provided that no such amendment shall come into force unless it
has been approved by the Executive Council of the University.

CHAPTER – VIII
24. Rule Making
The Patron may appoint a Committee for framing such rules as may be
necessary for the working of the Constitution. The rules so framed will
come into effect from a date to be notified by the Patron.

25. Interpretation of the Constitution, Removal of Doubts and
Difficulties.
If any question arises relating to the interpretation of this Constitution or
any rules framed thereunder, it shall be referred to the Patron whose
decision thereon shall be final.

26. Appointment of a Tribunal
The Patron may, if he considers it necessary, refer any matter concerning
the Union to a Tribunal consisting of one or more persons to be appointed

15

by the Executive Council of the University. The decision of the Tribunal shall
be final.

27. Emergency Power
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the Patron in any
emergency may take any action as he deems fit and report the same to the
Executive Council of the University.

28. Commencement of the Constitution
This Constitution, or any amendment thereof, shall come into force with
effect from a date to be notified by the Patron.
*******************

16

